Documentation for := vs <> (#2222)
chipsalliance/chisel3: docs/src/explanations/Connection-operators-.md

## Concept 3: Always Use `:=` to assign DontCare to Wires
When assigning `DontCare` to something that is not directioned, should you use `:=` or `<>`? 
We will find out using the sample codes below:
( Scastie link for the experiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/Shorla/ZIGsWcylRqKJhZCkKWlSIA/1)

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import chisel3._
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO

class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
  val out = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  //connect Producer to IO
  io.in := DontCare
  p.io.a <> DontCare
  val tmp = Wire(Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))))
  tmp := DontCare
  p.io.a <> io.in
  // connect producer to consumer
  c.io.a <> p.io.b
  //connect consumer to IO
  io.out <> c.io.b
}
class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.b <> io.a
}
```
Below we can see the resulting error for this example:
```scala mdoc
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```
### Conclusion:

> When `<>` was used to assign the unidrectioned wire `tmp` to DontCare, we got an error.

Reviewer: The code above uses `:=` to assign `tmp`. We did not get an error. This text needs to be adjusted ... 
```suggestion
If `<>` were used to assign the unidrectioned wire `tmp` to DontCare, we would get an error. But in the example above, we used `:=` and no errors occurred.
```

```scala mdoc
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```
And here is another experiment, where we remove one of the fields of MockDecoupledIO:
( Scastie link for the experiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/ChtkhKCpS9CvJkjjqpdeIA)

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import chisel3._
import chisel3.stage.ChiselStage
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO

class MockDecoupledIO extends Bundle {
  val valid = Output(Bool())
  val ready = Input(Bool())
  //val bits = Output(UInt(8.W))
}
class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(new MockDecoupledIO())
  val out = new MockDecoupledIO()
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  // connect producer to I/O
  p.io.a <> io.in
  // connect producer  to consumer
  c.io.a <> p.io.b
  // connect consumer to I/O
  io.out <> c.io.b
}
class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.a <> io.b
}
```
Below we can see the resulting Verilog for this example:
```scala mdoc:crash
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```
This one fails because there is a field `bits` missing.

### Conclusion:

> It doesn't matter the order of the fields, they need to be the same.
> For `:=`, the Scala types do not need to match but all the signals on the LHS must be provided by the RHS or you will get a Chisel elaboration error. There may be additional signals on the RHS, these will be ignored.

Reviewer: This conclusion is a bit confusing given that we have shown both `<>` and `:=` and that they are different.
```suggestion
For `:=`, the Scala types do not need to match but all the signals on the LHS must be provided by the RHS or you will get a Chisel elaboration error. There may be additional signals on the RHS, these will be ignored. For `<>`, the Scala types do not need to match, but all signals must match exactly between LHS and RHS. In both cases, the order of the fields does not matter.

```

---

layout: docs

title:  "Deep Dive into Connection Operators"

section: "chisel3"

---

# Further Explanation for the := and  <> Operators

> Chisel contains two connection operators, `:=` and `<>`. This document provides a deeper explanation of the differences of the two and when to use one or the other. The differences are demonstrated with experiments using Scastie examples + DecoupledIO examples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Chisel contains two connection operators, `:=` and `<>`. This document provides a deeper explanation of the differences of the two and when to use one or the other. The differences are demonstrated with experiments using Scastie examples which use `DecoupledIO`.
```

### Experiment Setup

```scala mdoc
// Imports used by the following examples
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO
```

> The diagram for the experiment can be viewed **[here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14C918Hdahk2xOGSJJBT-ZVqAx99_hg3JQIq-vaaifQU/edit?usp=sharing)**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The diagram for the experiment can be viewed [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14C918Hdahk2xOGSJJBT-ZVqAx99_hg3JQIq-vaaifQU/edit?usp=sharing)
```

I don't think we need this to be bold

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The diagram for the experiment can be viewed **[here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14C918Hdahk2xOGSJJBT-ZVqAx99_hg3JQIq-vaaifQU/edit?usp=sharing)**

```

I don't think this was changed, although it's marked as resolved. I'm also adding a whitespace between this and the actual image.

![Experiment Image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/chipsalliance/chisel3/master/docs/src/images/chisel_01.png?sanitize=true)

```scala mdoc:silent

class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
  val out = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  // connect Producer to IO
  p.io.a <> io.in
  // connect producer to consumer
  c.io.a <> p.io.b
  // connect consumer to IO
  io.out <> c.io.b
}
class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.b <> io.a
}
```
Below we can see the resulting Verilog for this example:
```scala mdoc
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```

> ## Concept 1: <> is Commutative

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Concept 1: `<>` is Commutative
```

This experiment is set up to test for the function of `<>` using the experiment above.

> Achieving this involves flipping the RHS and LHS of each arrow and seeing how '<>'  will react.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Achieving this involves flipping the RHS and LHS of the `<>` operator and seeing how `<>`  will react.
```

( Scastie link for the experiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/Shorla/LVhlbkFQQnq7X3trHfgZZQ )

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO

class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
  val out = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  // connect Producer to IO
  io.in := p.io.a
  // connect producer to consumer
  p.io.b := c.io.a
  // connect consumer to IO
  c.io.b := io.out
}

class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.a <> io.b
}
```
Below we can see the resulting Verilog for this example:
```scala mdoc
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```
### Conclusion: 

> The Verilog remained the same without incurring errors, showing that the `<>` operator is generally commutative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Verilog remained the same without incurring errors, showing that the `<>` operator is commutative.
```

> ## Concept 2: := means assign ALL signals from the RHS to the LHS, regardless of their direction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Concept 2: := means assign ALL LHS signals from the RHS, regardless of their direction.
```

> Using the same experiment code as above, we set to test for the function of `:=`
> To achieve this, `<>` is being replaced with `:=` in the sample code above.
> (Scastie link to the experiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/Shorla/o1ShdaY3RWKf0IIFwwQ1UQ)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the same experiment code as above, we set to test for the function of `:=`
We replace all instances of `<>` with `:=` in the sample code above.
(Scastie link to the experiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/Shorla/o1ShdaY3RWKf0IIFwwQ1UQ)
```

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO

class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
  val out = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  // connect Producer to IO
  p.io.a <> io.in
  // connect producer to consumer
  c.io.b <> p.io.b
  // connect consumer to IO
  io.out <> c.io.b
}
class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.b := io.a
}
```
Below we can see the resulting error message for this example:
```scala mdoc:crash
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```

> ###Conclusion:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Conclusion:
```

> The := operator goes field-by-field and attempts to connect the RHS to the LHS. If something on the LHS is actually an Input, or something on the RHS is an Output, you will get an error as shown above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The := operator goes field-by-field on the LHS and attempts to connect it to the same-named signal from the RHS. If something on the LHS is actually an Input, or the corresponding signal on the RHS is an Output, you will get an error as shown above.
```

> ## Concept 3: Always Use := to assign DontCare to Wires

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Concept 3: Always Use `:=` to assign DontCare to Wires
```

We will find out using the sample codes below:
( Scastie link for the experiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/Shorla/ZIGsWcylRqKJhZCkKWlSIA/1)

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO

class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
  val out = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  //connect Producer to IO
  io.in := DontCare
  p.io.a <> DontCare
  val tmp = Wire(Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))))
  tmp := DontCare
  p.io.a <> io.in
  // connect producer to consumer
  c.io.a <> p.io.b
  //connect consumer to IO
  io.out <> c.io.b
}
class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.b <> io.a
}
```
Below we can see the resulting error for this example:
```scala mdoc:crash
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```
### Conclusion:
When `<>` was used to assign the unidrectioned wire `tmp` to DontCare, we got an error.
But when `:=` was used to assign the wire to DontCare, no errors will occur.

> Thus, when assigning DontCare to a wire, always use `:=`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, when assigning DontCare to a `Wire`, always use `:=`.
```

> ##  Concept 4: You can use <> or := to assign DontCare to directioned things (IOs)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##  Concept 4: You can use `<>` or `:=` to assign `DontCare` to directioned things (IOs)
```

When assigning `DontCare` to something that is directioned, should you use `:=` or `<>`? 
We will find out using the sample codes below:
( Scastie link for the experiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/Shorla/ZIGsWcylRqKJhZCkKWlSIA/1)

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO

class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
  val out = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  //connect Producer to IO
  io.in := DontCare
  p.io.a <> DontCare
  val tmp = Wire(Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))))
  tmp <> DontCare
  p.io.a <> io.in
  // connect producer to consumer
  c.io.a <> p.io.b
  //connect consumer to IO
  io.out <> c.io.b
}
class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.b <> io.a
}
```
Below we can see the resulting Verilog for this example:
```scala mdoc
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```
### Conclusion: 

> Both `<>` and `:=` can be used to assign directioned things (IOs) to DontCare as shown in `io.in` and `p.io.a` respectively. This is basically equivalent because in this case both `<>` and `:=` will determine the direction from the LHS.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this conclusion is really correct. Might need to tweak this example a bit more

Author: okay. We could look at it at tomorrow's meeting.

If there is at least one known flow what will <> do? This will be showed using the experiment code.
( Scastie link for the experiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/Shorla/gKx9ReLVTTqDTk9vmw5ozg)

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO

class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
  val out = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  //connect Producer to IO
    // For this experiment, we add a temporary wire and see if it works...
  //p.io.a <> io.in
  val tmp = Wire(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
  // connect intermediate wire
  tmp <> io.in
  p.io.a <> tmp
  //p.io.a <> io.in
  // connect producer to consumer
  c.io.a <> p.io.b
  //connect consumer to IO
  io.out <> c.io.b
}
class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.b <> io.a
}
```
Below we can see the resulting Verilog for this example:
```scala mdoc
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```
### Conclusion:

> The connection above went smoothly with no errors, this goes to show <> will work as long as there is at least one directioned thing (IO or submodule's IO) to "fix" the direction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The connection above went smoothly with no errors, this goes to show `<>` will work as long as there is at least one directioned thing (IO or submodule's IO) to "fix" the direction.
```

> ## Concept 7: <> and := connects signals by field name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Concept 7: `<>` and `:=` connect signals by field name.
```

  })
  io.a <> io.b
}
```
Below we can see the resulting Verilog for this example:
```scala mdoc
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```
And here is another experiment, where we remove one of the fields of MockDecoupledIO:
( Scastie link for the experiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/ChtkhKCpS9CvJkjjqpdeIA)

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO

class MockDecoupledIO extends Bundle {
  val valid = Output(Bool())
  val ready = Input(Bool())
  //val bits = Output(UInt(8.W))
}
class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(new MockDecoupledIO())
  val out = new MockDecoupledIO()
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  // connect producer to I/O
  p.io.a <> io.in
  // connect producer  to consumer
  c.io.a <> p.io.b
  // connect consumer to I/O
  io.out <> c.io.b
}
class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.a <> io.b
}
```
Below we can see the resulting Verilog for this example:
```scala mdoc:crash
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```

> This one fails because there is a field 'bits' missing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This one fails because there is a field `bits` missing.
```

### Conclusion:
It doesn't matter the order of the fields, they need to be the same.

> Same is true for ':=', the Scala types do not need to match but all the signals must match up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For ':=', the Scala types do not need to match but all the signals on the LHS must be provided by the RHS. There may be additional signals on the RHS, these will be ignored.
```

> For ':=', the Scala types do not need to match but all the signals on the LHS must be provided by the RHS or you will get a Chisel elaboration error. There may be additional signals on the RHS, these will be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For `:=`, the Scala types do not need to match but all the signals on the LHS must be provided by the RHS or you will get a Chisel elaboration error. There may be additional signals on the RHS, these will be ignored.
```

The Verilog remained the same without incurring errors, showing that the `<>` operator is generally commutative.

## Concept 2: := means assign ALL signals from the RHS to the LHS, regardless of their direction.
Using the same experiment code as above, we set to test for the function of ":="
To achieve this, "<>" is being replaced with ":=" in the sample code above.
(Scastie link to the experiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/Shorla/o1ShdaY3RWKf0IIFwwQ1UQ)

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO

class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
  val out = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  // connect Producer to IO
  p.io.a <> io.in
  // connect producer to consumer
  c.io.b <> p.io.b
  // connect consumer to IO
  io.out <> c.io.b
}
class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.b := io.a
}
```
Below we can see the resulting error message for this example:
```scala modc:crash
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)

> 

Reviewer: somethign got messed up here perhaps by my suggestChange :(

Author: I adjusted it offline, pushing it now

```scala modc
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```
### Conclusion: 
The Verilog remained the same without incurring errors, showing that the `<>` operator is generally commutative.

## Concept 2: := means assign ALL signals from the RHS to the LHS, regardless of their direction.
Using the same experiment code as above, we set to test for the function of ":="
To achieve this, "<>" is being replaced with ":=" in the sample code above.
(Scastie link to the experiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/Shorla/o1ShdaY3RWKf0IIFwwQ1UQ)

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO

class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
  val out = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  // connect Producer to IO
  p.io.a <> io.in
  // connect producer to consumer
  c.io.b <> p.io.b
  // connect consumer to IO
  io.out <> c.io.b
}
class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.b := io.a
}
```

> Below we can see the resulting error message for this example:
> ```scala modc:crash
> ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
> ```
> ### Conclusion:
> The `:=` operator goes field-by-field and attempts to connect the RHS to the LHS. If something on the LHS is actually an `Input`, or something on the RHS is an `Output`, you will get this error:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below we can see the resulting error message for this example:
```scala modc:crash
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```
### Conclusion:
The `:=` operator goes field-by-field and attempts to connect the RHS to the LHS. If something on the LHS is actually an `Input`, or something on the RHS is an `Output`, you will get an error.

```

## Concept 3: Always Use := to assign DontCare to Wires

When assigning `DontCare` to something that is not directioned, should you use `:=` or `<>`? 
We will find out using the sample codes below:
( Scastie link for the experiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/Shorla/ZIGsWcylRqKJhZCkKWlSIA/1)

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO

class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
  val out = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  //connect Producer to IO
  io.in := DontCare
  p.io.a <> DontCare
  val tmp = Wire(Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))))
  tmp := DontCare
  p.io.a <> io.in
  // connect producer to consumer
  c.io.a <> p.io.b
  //connect consumer to IO
  io.out <> c.io.b
}
class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.b <> io.a
}
```

> Below we can see the resulting Verilog for this example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below we can see the resulting error for this example:
```

##  Concept 5:  `<>` Cannot be used to connect two non-directioned things (Wires)
The goal is to check if `<>` can connect two `Wire`s using the Experiment code above.
( Scastie link for the ecperiment:https://scastie.scala-lang.org/Shorla/ZIGsWcylRqKJhZCkKWlSIA/1)

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import chisel3._
import chisel3.util.DecoupledIO

class Wrapper extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
  val in = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
  val out = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  val p = Module(new PipelineStage)
  val c = Module(new PipelineStage) 
  //connect Producer to IO
  io.in := DontCare
  p.io.a <> DontCare
  val tmp = Wire(Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))))
  tmp := DontCare
  p.io.a <> io.in
  // connect producer to consumer
  c.io.a <> p.io.b
  //connect consumer to IO
  io.out <> c.io.b
}
class PipelineStage extends Module{
  val io = IO(new Bundle{
    val a = Flipped(DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W)))
    val b = DecoupledIO(UInt(8.W))
  })
  io.b <> io.a
}
```
Below we can see the resulting Verilog for this example:
```scala modc:crash
ChiselStage.emitVerilog(new Wrapper)
```
### Conclusion:

> <<<<<<< HEAD

Reviewer: we need to clean up this merge conflict
